[KOGITO-7951] Adding custom types through addons (#223)
kiegroup/kogito-docs: serverlessworkflow/modules/ROOT/pages/core/custom-functions-support.adoc

Avoid using `java` functions to call the external services, instead you can use the xref:service-orchestration/orchestration-of-openapi-based-services.adoc[services orchestration features].
====

== Custom function types

> You can add your our custom types by using Kogito add-on mechanism. As predefined custom types like `sysout` or `java`, the custom type identifier is the prefix of the operation field of the function definition. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can add your own custom types by using Kogito add-on mechanism. As predefined custom types like `sysout` or `java`, the custom type identifier is the prefix of the operation field of the function definition. 
```

> You can add your our custom types by using Kogito add-on mechanism. As predefined custom types like `sysout` or `java`, the custom type identifier is the prefix of the operation field of the function definition. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can add your custom types by using the Kogito add-on mechanism. As predefined xref:core/custom-functions-support.adoc[custom types like `sysout` or `java`], the custom type identifier is the prefix of the operation field of the function definition. 
```

> Kogito add-ons relies on link:https://es.quarkus.io/guides/writing-extensions[Quarkus extensions] mechanism. And add-on consist of at least two Maven projects:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Kogito add-ons relies on link:{quarkus_guides_base_url}/writing-extensions[Quarkus extensions] mechanism. And add-on consists of at least two Maven projects:
```

- deployment, which is responsible for generating code required for the extension to work.
- runtime, which include the non generated classes that are required for the extension to work. 

In the case of a serverless workflow custom type:

> - Deployment project is expected to configure the work item handler that will be used during runtime to perform the logic associated to the custom type. It must contain a Java class that inherits from `WorkItemTypeHandler`. Its responsibilities are to indicate the custom type identifier (the operation prefix, as indicated earlier) and to setup the `WorkItemNodeFactory` instance passed as parameter of `fillWorkItemHandler` method. That instance is included in the Kogito process definition for that Workflow. As part of this setup, you must indicate the name of the  `WorkItemNodeFactory`. You might also provide any relevant metadata for that handler, if needed. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- The deployment project is expected to configure the work item handler used during runtime to perform the logic associated with the custom type. It must contain a Java class that inherits from `WorkItemTypeHandler`. Its responsibilities are to indicate the custom type identifier (the operation prefix, as indicated earlier) and to set up the `WorkItemNodeFactory` instance passed as a parameter of the `fillWorkItemHandler` method. That instance is included in the Kogito process definition for that Workflow. As part of this setup, you must indicate the name of the  `WorkItemNodeFactory`. You might also provide any relevant metadata for that handler if needed. 
```

Can you link back to `WorkItemTypeHandler` from the kogito-runtimes project?

> - Runtime project consists of a `WorkflowWorkItemHandler` implementation, which name must match the one provided to `WorkItemNodeFactory` during the deployment phase, and a `WorkItemHandlerConfig` bean that register that handler with that name. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Runtime project consists of a `WorkflowWorkItemHandler` implementation, which name must match the one provided to `WorkItemNodeFactory` during the deployment phase and a `WorkItemHandlerConfig` bean that register that handler with that name. 
```

>  When a Serverless workflow function is called, Kogito identifies the proper `WorkflowWorkItemHandler` instance to be used for that function type (using the handler name associated to that type by the deployment project) and then invokes `internalExecute` method. The `Map` parameter contains the function arguments defined in the Workflow and the `WorkItem` parameter contains the  metadata information added to the handler by the deployment project. Hence, `executeWorkItem` implementation has access to all the information needed to perform the computational logic intended for that custom type. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
 When a Serverless workflow function is called, Kogito identifies the proper `WorkflowWorkItemHandler` instance to be used for that function type (using the handler name associated with that type by the deployment project) and then invokes the `internalExecute` method. The `Map` parameter contains the function arguments defined in the Workflow, and the `WorkItem` parameter contains the metadata information added to the handler by the deployment project. Hence, the `executeWorkItem` implementation has access to all the information needed to perform the computational logic intended for that custom type. 
```

=== Custom function type example. 

> Lets assume we want to interact, from a workflow file, with a legacy RPC server as the one defined link:https://github.com/kiegroup/kogito-examples/tree/stable/serverless-workflow-examples/serverless-workflow-custom-type/serverless-workflow-custom-rpc-server[this project]. This legacy server support four simple arithmetic operations: add, minus, multiply an divide, that can be invoked using a custom RPC protocol. Since this a non common protocol, workflow cannot handle them by using any of the predefined Serveless workflow function types. The available options are to use a Java Service, which invokes a Java class that knows how to interact with the server; or define a custom type that knows how to interact with the service. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's assume we want to interact, from a workflow file, with a legacy RPC server as the one defined link:https://github.com/kiegroup/kogito-examples/tree/stable/serverless-workflow-examples/serverless-workflow-custom-type/serverless-workflow-custom-rpc-server[this project]. This legacy server supports four simple arithmetic operations: add, minus, multiply and divide, that can be invoked using a custom RPC protocol. Since this a non common protocol, workflow cannot handle them by using any of the predefined Serverless workflow function types. The available options are to use a Java Service, which invokes a Java class that knows how to interact with the server; or define a custom type that knows how to interact with the service. 
```

> Lets assume we want to interact, from a workflow file, with a legacy RPC server as the one defined link:https://github.com/kiegroup/kogito-examples/tree/stable/serverless-workflow-examples/serverless-workflow-custom-type/serverless-workflow-custom-rpc-server[this project]. This legacy server support four simple arithmetic operations: add, minus, multiply an divide, that can be invoked using a custom RPC protocol. Since this a non common protocol, workflow cannot handle them by using any of the predefined Serveless workflow function types. The available options are to use a Java Service, which invokes a Java class that knows how to interact with the server; or define a custom type that knows how to interact with the service. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Assume you want to interact, from a workflow file, with a legacy RPC server as the one defined in link:https://github.com/kiegroup/kogito-examples/tree/stable/serverless-workflow-examples/serverless-workflow-custom-type/serverless-workflow-custom-rpc-server[this project]. This legacy server supports four simple arithmetic operations: add, minus, multiply, and divide, which can be invoked using a custom RPC protocol. Since this is a noncommon protocol, the workflow cannot handle them using predefined Serveless Workflow function types. The available options are to use a Java Service, which invokes a Java class that knows how to interact with the server or define a custom type that knows how to interact with the service. 
```

Using  the latter approach, users can write a link:https://github.com/kiegroup/kogito-examples/blob/stable/serverless-workflow-examples/serverless-workflow-custom-type/serverless-workflow-custom-type-example/src/main/resources/customType.sw.json[workflow file] defining this function. 

> [source,json]

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
.RPC Custom Function definition example
[source,json]
```

----
 "functions": [
    {
      "name": "division",
      "type": "custom",
      "operation": "rpc:division"
    }
  ],
----

> `operation` starts with `rpc`, which is the custom type type identifier, and continues with `division`, which denotes the operation that is going to be executed in the legacy server

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`operation` starts with `rpc`, which is the custom type identifier, and continues with `division`, which denotes the operation that is going to be executed in the legacy server
```

> `operation` starts with `rpc`, which is the custom type type identifier, and continues with `division`, which denotes the operation that is going to be executed in the legacy server

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `operation` starts with `rpc`, which is the custom type identifier and continues with `division`, which denotes the operation that is going to be executed in the legacy server
```

> In order this function definition to be recognized, a Kogito addon that defines the `rpc` custom type needs to be developed. It consist of a  link:https://github.com/kiegroup/kogito-examples/tree/stable/serverless-workflow-examples/serverless-workflow-custom-type/serverless-workflow-custom-rpc-deployment[deployment project] and a link:https://github.com/kiegroup/kogito-examples/tree/stable/serverless-workflow-examples/serverless-workflow-custom-type/serverless-workflow-custom-rpc[runtime project]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In order for this function definition to be recognized, a Kogito addon that defines the `rpc` custom type needs to be developed. It consists of a  link:https://github.com/kiegroup/kogito-examples/tree/stable/serverless-workflow-examples/serverless-workflow-custom-type/serverless-workflow-custom-rpc-deployment[deployment project] and a link:https://github.com/kiegroup/kogito-examples/tree/stable/serverless-workflow-examples/serverless-workflow-custom-type/serverless-workflow-custom-rpc[runtime project]
```

> In order this function definition to be recognized, a Kogito addon that defines the `rpc` custom type needs to be developed. It consist of a  link:https://github.com/kiegroup/kogito-examples/tree/stable/serverless-workflow-examples/serverless-workflow-custom-type/serverless-workflow-custom-rpc-deployment[deployment project] and a link:https://github.com/kiegroup/kogito-examples/tree/stable/serverless-workflow-examples/serverless-workflow-custom-type/serverless-workflow-custom-rpc[runtime project]

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For this function definition to be recognized, a Kogito addon that defines the `rpc` custom type needs to be developed. It consists of a  link:https://github.com/kiegroup/kogito-examples/tree/stable/serverless-workflow-examples/serverless-workflow-custom-type/serverless-workflow-custom-rpc-deployment[deployment project] and a link:https://github.com/kiegroup/kogito-examples/tree/stable/serverless-workflow-examples/serverless-workflow-custom-type/serverless-workflow-custom-rpc[runtime project]
```

> Deployment project is responsible to extend link:https://github.com/kiegroup/kogito-examples/blob/stable/serverless-workflow-examples/serverless-workflow-custom-type/serverless-workflow-custom-rpc-deployment/src/main/java/org/kie/kogito/examples/sw/services/RPCCustomTypeHandler.java[`WorkItemTypeHandler`] and setup the `WorkItemNodeFactory`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The deployment project is responsible for extending link:https://github.com/kiegroup/kogito-examples/blob/stable/serverless-workflow-examples/serverless-workflow-custom-type/serverless-workflow-custom-rpc-deployment/src/main/java/org/kie/kogito/examples/sw/services/RPCCustomTypeHandler.java[`WorkItemTypeHandler`] and setup the `WorkItemNodeFactory`
```

> [source,java]

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
.Example of the RPC Function Java implementation
[source,java]
```

----

import static org.kie.kogito.examples.sw.custom.RPCCustomWorkItemHandler.NAME;
import static org.kie.kogito.examples.sw.custom.RPCCustomWorkItemHandler.OPERATION;

>  @Override

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    @Override
```

    protected <T extends RuleFlowNodeContainerFactory<T, ?>> WorkItemNodeFactory<T> fillWorkItemHandler(Workflow workflow,
                                                                                                        ParserContext context,
                                                                                                        WorkItemNodeFactory<T> node,
                                                                                                        FunctionDefinition functionDef) {
        return node.workName(NAME).metaData(OPERATION, trimCustomOperation(functionDef));
    }
----

> This setups the name of the `KogitoWorkItemHandler` and adds a metadata key that extracts the name of the operation to performed in the legacy server from the Serverless workflow function definition

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This example setups the name of the `KogitoWorkItemHandler` and adds a metadata key that extracts the name of the operation to perform in the legacy server from the Serverless workflow function definition
```

> Runtime project contains the link:https://github.com/kiegroup/kogito-examples/blob/stable/serverless-workflow-examples/serverless-workflow-custom-type/serverless-workflow-custom-rpc/src/main/java/org/kie/kogito/examples/sw/custom/RPCCustomWorkItemHandler.java[KogitoWorkItemHandler] and the https://github.com/kiegroup/kogito-examples/blob/stable/serverless-workflow-examples/serverless-workflow-custom-type/serverless-workflow-custom-rpc/src/main/java/org/kie/kogito/examples/sw/custom/RPCCustomWorkItemHandlerConfig.java[WorkItemHandlerConfig] implementations. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The Runtime project contains the link:https://github.com/kiegroup/kogito-examples/blob/stable/serverless-workflow-examples/serverless-workflow-custom-type/serverless-workflow-custom-rpc/src/main/java/org/kie/kogito/examples/sw/custom/RPCCustomWorkItemHandler.java[KogitoWorkItemHandler] and the https://github.com/kiegroup/kogito-examples/blob/stable/serverless-workflow-examples/serverless-workflow-custom-type/serverless-workflow-custom-rpc/src/main/java/org/kie/kogito/examples/sw/custom/RPCCustomWorkItemHandlerConfig.java[WorkItemHandlerConfig] implementations. 
```

> As expected, RPCCustomWorkItemHandler implements `internalExecute` method

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As expected, `RPCCustomWorkItemHandler` implements `internalExecute` method
```

> [source, java]

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
.Example of implementation if the `internalExecute` method
[source, java]
```

----

>  @Override
>     protected Object internalExecute(KogitoWorkItem workItem, Map<String, Object> parameters)  {
>         try {
>             Iterator<?> iter = parameters.values().iterator();
>             Map<String, Object> metadata = workItem.getNodeInstance().getNode().getMetaData();
>             String operationId = (String) metadata.get(OPERATION);
>             if (operationId == null) {
>                 throw new IllegalArgumentException ("Operation is a mandatory parameter");
>             }
>             return CalculatorClient.invokeOperation((String)metadata.getOrDefault(HOST,"localhost"), (int) metadata.getOrDefault(PORT, 8082), 
>                     OperationId.valueOf(operationId.toUpperCase()), (Integer)iter.next(), (Integer)iter.next());
>         } catch (IOException io ) {
>             throw new UncheckedIOException(io);
>         }
>     }

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
 @Override
protected Object internalExecute(KogitoWorkItem workItem, Map<String, Object> parameters)  {
    try {
        Iterator<?> iter = parameters.values().iterator();
        Map<String, Object> metadata = workItem.getNodeInstance().getNode().getMetaData();
        String operationId = (String) metadata.get(OPERATION);
        if (operationId == null) {
            throw new IllegalArgumentException ("Operation is a mandatory parameter");
        }
        return CalculatorClient.invokeOperation((String)metadata.getOrDefault(HOST,"localhost"), (int) metadata.getOrDefault(PORT, 8082), 
                OperationId.valueOf(operationId.toUpperCase()), (Integer)iter.next(), (Integer)iter.next());
    } catch (IOException io ) {
        throw new UncheckedIOException(io);
    }
}
```

----

> The implementation invokes link:https://github.com/kiegroup/kogito-examples/blob/stable/serverless-workflow-examples/serverless-workflow-custom-type/serverless-workflow-custom-rpc-server/src/main/java/org/kie/kogito/examples/sw/custom/CalculatorClient.java#L45-L67[CalculatorClient.invokeOperation], a java static method that knows how to interact with the legacy service. The operation parameter is obtained from WorkItem metadata. Dividend and divisor parameters are obtained from the Map parameter, which contains the function arguments as defined in the workflow file.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The implementation invokes link:https://github.com/kiegroup/kogito-examples/blob/stable/serverless-workflow-examples/serverless-workflow-custom-type/serverless-workflow-custom-rpc-server/src/main/java/org/kie/kogito/examples/sw/custom/CalculatorClient.java#L45-L67[`CalculatorClient.invokeOperation`], a java static method that knows how to interact with the legacy service. The operation parameter is obtained from the `WorkItem` metadata. Dividend and divisor parameters are obtained from the Map parameter, which contains the function arguments defined in the workflow file.
```

> [source, json]

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
.Example of the custom function call from the workflow definition
[source, json]
```

----
"actions": [
       {
          "functionRef": {
             "refName": "division",
             "arguments": {
                 "dividend": ".dividend",
                 "divisor" : ".divisor"
             }
           }
          
       }
----

> RPCCustomWorkItemHandlerConfig is a bean which registers the handler name

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `RPCCustomWorkItemHandlerConfig` is a bean that registers the handler name
```

> [source, java]

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
.Example of injecting the custom`WorkItemHandler`
[source, java]
```

----

>  @Inject
>     RPCCustomWorkItemHandler handler;
>     
>     @PostConstruct
>     void init () {
>         register(handler.getName(),handler);
>     }

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
@Inject
RPCCustomWorkItemHandler handler;

@PostConstruct
void init () {
    register(handler.getName(),handler);
}
```

Using  the latter approach, users can write a link:{kogito_sw_examples_url}/serverless-workflow-custom-type/serverless-workflow-custom-type-example/src/main/resources/customType.sw.json[workflow file] defining this function. 

.RPC Custom Function definition example
[source,json]
----
 "functions": [
    {
      "name": "division",
      "type": "custom",
      "operation": "rpc:division"
    }
  ],
----
The `operation` starts with `rpc`, which is the custom type identifier, and continues with `division`, which denotes the operation that is going to be executed in the legacy server

For this function definition to be recognized, a Kogito addon that defines the `rpc` custom type needs to be developed. It consists of a  link:{kogito_sw_examples_url}/serverless-workflow-custom-type/serverless-workflow-custom-rpc-deployment[deployment project] and a link:{kogito_sw_examples_url}/serverless-workflow-custom-type/serverless-workflow-custom-rpc[runtime project]

> The deployment project is responsible for extending link:{kogito_sw_examples_url}/serverless-workflow-custom-type/serverless-workflow-custom-rpc-deployment/src/main/java/org/kie/kogito/examples/sw/services/RPCCustomTypeHandler.java[`WorkItemTypeHandler`] and setup the `WorkItemNodeFactory`

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The deployment project is responsible for extending link:{kogito_sw_examples_url}/serverless-workflow-custom-type/serverless-workflow-custom-rpc-deployment/src/main/java/org/kie/kogito/examples/sw/services/RPCCustomTypeHandler.java[`WorkItemTypeHandler`] and setup the `WorkItemNodeFactory`:
```

.Example of the RPC Function Java implementation
[source,java]
----

import static org.kie.kogito.examples.sw.custom.RPCCustomWorkItemHandler.NAME;
import static org.kie.kogito.examples.sw.custom.RPCCustomWorkItemHandler.OPERATION;
    @Override
    protected <T extends RuleFlowNodeContainerFactory<T, ?>> WorkItemNodeFactory<T> fillWorkItemHandler(Workflow workflow,
                                                                                                        ParserContext context,
                                                                                                        WorkItemNodeFactory<T> node,
                                                                                                        FunctionDefinition functionDef) {
        return node.workName(NAME).metaData(OPERATION, trimCustomOperation(functionDef));
    }
----

> This example setups the name of the `KogitoWorkItemHandler` and adds a metadata key that extracts the name of the operation to perform in the legacy server from the Serverless workflow function definition

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This example setups the name of the `KogitoWorkItemHandler` and adds a metadata key that extracts the name of the operation to perform in the legacy server from the Serverless workflow function definition.
```

The Runtime project contains the link:{kogito_sw_examples_url}/serverless-workflow-custom-type/serverless-workflow-custom-rpc/src/main/java/org/kie/kogito/examples/sw/custom/RPCCustomWorkItemHandler.java[KogitoWorkItemHandler] and the {kogito_sw_examples_url}/serverless-workflow-custom-type/serverless-workflow-custom-rpc/src/main/java/org/kie/kogito/examples/sw/custom/RPCCustomWorkItemHandlerConfig.java[WorkItemHandlerConfig] implementations. 

As expected, `RPCCustomWorkItemHandler` implements `internalExecute` method

> .Example of implementation if the `internalExecute` method

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion

.Example of implementation if the `internalExecute` method
```

Kogito add-ons relies on link:{quarkus_guides_base_url}/writing-extensions[Quarkus extensions] mechanism. And an add-on consists of at least two Maven projects:

- the deployment module, which is responsible for generating code required for the extension to work.
- the runtime module, which include the non generated classes that are required for the extension to work. 

In the case of a serverless workflow custom type, here are the roles of the modules:

- **The deployment project** is expected to configure the work item handler used during runtime to perform the logic associated with the custom type. +
It must contain a Java class that inherits from `WorkItemTypeHandler`. Its responsibilities are to indicate the custom type identifier (the operation prefix, as indicated earlier) and to set up the `WorkItemNodeFactory` instance passed as a parameter of the `fillWorkItemHandler` method. That instance is included in the Kogito process definition for that Workflow. As part of this setup, you must indicate the name of the  `WorkItemNodeFactory`. You might also provide any relevant metadata for that handler if needed. 

> - **The runtime project** consists of a `WorkflowWorkItemHandler` implementation, which name must match the one provided to `WorkItemNodeFactory` during the deployment phase and a `WorkItemHandlerConfig` bean that register that handler with that name. +

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- **The runtime project** consists of a `WorkflowWorkItemHandler` implementation, which name must match the one provided to `WorkItemNodeFactory` during the deployment phase and a `WorkItemHandlerConfig` bean that registers that handler with that name. +
```

      "type": "custom",
      "operation": "rpc:division"
    }
  ],
----
The `operation` starts with `rpc`, which is the custom type identifier, and continues with `division`, which denotes the operation that is going to be executed in the legacy server

For this function definition to be recognized, a Kogito addon that defines the `rpc` custom type needs to be developed: it consists of a  link:{kogito_sw_examples_url}/serverless-workflow-custom-type/serverless-workflow-custom-rpc-deployment[deployment project] and a link:{kogito_sw_examples_url}/serverless-workflow-custom-type/serverless-workflow-custom-rpc[runtime project].

The deployment project is responsible for extending link:{kogito_sw_examples_url}/serverless-workflow-custom-type/serverless-workflow-custom-rpc-deployment/src/main/java/org/kie/kogito/examples/sw/services/RPCCustomTypeHandler.java[`WorkItemTypeHandler`] and setup the `WorkItemNodeFactory`:

.Example of the RPC Function Java implementation
[source,java]
----

import static org.kie.kogito.examples.sw.custom.RPCCustomWorkItemHandler.NAME;
import static org.kie.kogito.examples.sw.custom.RPCCustomWorkItemHandler.OPERATION;
    @Override

>     protected <T extends RuleFlowNodeContainerFactory<T, ?>> WorkItemNodeFactory<T> fillWorkItemHandler(Workflow workflow,

Reviewer 4: It would be also good to include the `type()` method here to show the mapping `type - WorkItemHandler`.
